>> Bianca: Merge sort,
which is our first sorting algorithm.
That is sub-quadratic time,
which is great.
Just means that this is
a sorting algorithm that
can take a substantial amount of data and
sort it for us, so it's pretty exciting.
All right, so divide and conquer.
So divide and conquer, when you think of
divide and conquer the first thing you
should think of is recursion.
>> Bianca: Yeah?
Who here has done divide and
conquer some time?
Okay, cool.
All it means is, you take a problem,
you break it into smaller sub problems.
Do the work on each sub-problem, and
then maybe combine them together.
The next divide and conquer,
where there's no combination step,
but this is the general recipe, is that
there is some combination step at the end.
And for us, merge-sort,
you might guess that the combination
is a merge at the end, maybe.
Cool?
Yeah, and you have to recognize a base
case, so you don't have an infinite loop.
Great.
>> Bianca: Here we are.
So I'm just gonna show you
the merge routine first,
before we break down
the entire merge sort.
So we start with these two sorted lists,
and we merge them into one sorted list.
The way we do that is,
we compare the first one in this sorted
list with this one
>> Bianca: If this one's smaller.
>> Bianca: We put it in there,
we put it in the final one.
Then we compare the next
one with the next one, and
then we put the smaller one.
>> Bianca: Again compare,
compare, 10's gonna be smaller.
We are going to x it.
10, 27, 82.
27 is smaller.
>> Bianca: All right,
so we compare 38 to 82.
38 is gonna to be smaller, although my
dyslexia almost made me say the other one.
>> Bianca: All right, we have 43, 82.
43 is going to be smaller.
Pop it in there.
Don't forget our x, and then we have 82.
So that's the procedure of
the merge routine, right?
We take these sorted lists, and
because they're sorted,
we can do this much easier.
Can someone guess what
the time complexity of this
might be.
>> Bianca: For
this routine?
>> Speaker 2: I'd say it's going
to be equal to whatever the shorter of
the list, cuz you have to do a comparison
equals length of the shorter list, right?
>> Speaker 3: Don't you think [CROSSTALK]
linear?
>> Speaker 2: Merge is linear.
>> Speaker 4: It's exponenential,
log?
>> Bianca: I have
heard every single one.
>> Speaker 2: I know.
>> Bianca: This is great.
>> Speaker 2: That's gonna throw out
in a sec.
>> Speaker 4: It's maybe
exponential?
>> Bianca: Exponential?
>> Speaker 4: Yeah.
>> Bianca: Well, the thing about merge
sort that we know,
is that it's not exponential for sure.
Cuz I said at the beginning,
since it's divide and
conquer it's not gonna be exponential.
So there's not gonna be nested loops here.
So given that,
cuz a few people said exponential,
maybe cuz we're just thinking, my gosh,
we have to do all these comparisons.
Maybe it's gonna be like a nested loop,
cuz that's what we've been doing.
But actually, if you think about it,
we just have a pointer, and
we're just incrementing
pointers on over one list and
pushing it into another list.
>> Bianca: So you're just comparing.
You don't need to do a nested loop.
>> Bianca: That make sense?
Cuz you're not comparing all
of these to all of these,
you're just comparing the first ones, or
the second, as you pop them off.
>> Speaker 2: So
you're saying it's linear?
>> Bianca: Mm-hm,
yep.
>> Speaker 2: But
if you had a list of 100
that were sorted and
a list of 20 that were sorted,
it would only be 20 comparisons, right?
Cuz I need to take the rest,
the remaining-
>> Bianca: Yeah,
it sort of depends on how
you implement it, but
yeah, hopefully you have
an optimization where that will just
copy the rest of it over,
and it will still be linear.
Because you'd still have to copy
each one over, you know what I mean?
There's no bulk copy paste situation,
unfortunately.
But the way it works is, we divide and
conquer, and
you roughly divide it in half every time.
If it's an odd number, it kinda gets.
It might be one off, but for
the most part, it's not gonna be 20/80.
And for the most part, I mean, never.
If your implementation's doing that,
then that's something,
that's not a merge sort.
>> Speaker 4: What if the two lists
are not sorted?
>> Bianca: If they're not sorted?
>> Speaker 4: Yeah, at the beginning
>> Bianca: Then it would be quadratic,
if it wasn't sorted.
But that's the magic of the merge sort,
is that we know that each of these
smaller arrays are gonna be sorted,
because we are gonna do that ourselves.
We're gonna do that work.
Yeah, but
I just wanted to sort of zoom in here.
We zoomed in to the merged part,
and then we're gonna zoom out.
We have, in this divide & conquer,
the base case, breaking down the problem,
doing the work,
which in this case is the same as combing
it, because our work is sorting it.
And merging is where the sorting
is really happening.
And we'll see what that means in a second.